Add macOS exporting and running pages. (#5105)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/export/running_on_mac.rst

.. _doc_running_on_mac:

Running Godot apps on macOS
===========================

By default, macOS will run only applications that are signed and notarized.

Depending on the way a macOS app is signed and distributed, the following scenarios are possible:

App is signed, notarized and distributed via App Store
------------------------------------------------------

.. note::

>     App developer have joined Apple Developer Program, and configured signing and notarization options during export, and uploaded it to the App Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    App developers need to join the Apple Developer Program, and configure signing and notarization options during export, then upload the app to the App Store.
```

The app should run out of the box, without extra user interaction required.

App is signed, notarized and distributed outside App Store
----------------------------------------------------------

.. note::

>     App developer have joined Apple Developer Program, and configured signing and notarization options during export, and distributed as ".DMG" or ".ZIP" archive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    App developers need to join the Apple Developer Program, and configure signing and notarization options during export, then distribute the app as ".DMG" or ".ZIP" archive.
```

When you run the app for the first time, the following dialog is displayed:

.. image:: img/signed_and_notarized_0.png

> Click "Open" to start the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click ``Open`` to start the app.
```

If you see the following warning dialog, your Mac is set up to allow apps only from the App Store.

.. image:: img/signed_and_notarized_1.png

> To allow third-party apps open "System Preferences", click "Security & Privacy", then click "General", unlock settings, and select "App Store and identified developers".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow third-party apps, open ``System Preferences``, click ``Security & Privacy``, then click ``General``, unlock settings, and select ``App Store and identified developers``.
```

.. image:: img/sys_pref_0.png

App is signed (including ad-hoc signatures) but not notarized
-------------------------------------------------------------

.. note::

    App developer used self-signed certificate or ad-hoc signing (default Godot behavior for exported project).

When you run the app for the first time, the following dialog is displayed:

.. image:: img/signed_0.png

To run this app, you can temporarily override Gatekeeper:

> * Either open "System Preferences", click "Security & Privacy", then click "General", and click "Open Anyway".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Either open ``System Preferences``, click ``Security & Privacy``, then click ``General``, and click ``Open Anyway``.
```

  .. image:: img/sys_pref_1.png

> * Or, right-click (Control-click) on the app icon in the "Finder" window and select "Open" from the menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Or, right-click (Control-click) on the app icon in the Finder window and select ``Open`` from the menu.
```

  .. image:: img/signed_1.png

> * Then click "Open" in the confirmation dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Then click ``Open`` in the confirmation dialog.
```

  .. image:: img/signed_2.png

* Enter your password if you're prompted.

App is not-signed, executable is linker-signed
----------------------------------------------

.. note::

    App is built using official export templates, but it is not signed.

When you run the app for the first time, the following dialog is displayed:

.. image:: img/linker_signed_1.png

> To run this app, you should remove "quarantine" extended file attribute manually:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run this app, you should remove the quarantine extended file attribute manually:
```

> * Open "Terminal.app" (press ``Cmd + Space``, and enter "Terminal").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Open ``Terminal.app`` (press ``Cmd + Space``, and enter ``Terminal``).
```

* Navigate to the folder containing the target application.

>   Use ``cd path_to_the_app_folder`` command, e.g. ``cd ~/Downloads/`` if it's in the "Downloads" folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Use the ``cd path_to_the_app_folder`` command, e.g. ``cd ~/Downloads/`` if it's in the ``Downloads`` folder.
```

> * Run following command ``xattr -dr com.apple.quarantine "Unsigned Game.app"`` (including quotation marks and ".app" extension).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run the command ``xattr -dr com.apple.quarantine "Unsigned Game.app"`` (including quotation marks and ``.app`` extension).
```

Neither app not executable is signed (relevant for Apple Silicon macs only)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. note::

    App is built using custom export templates, compiled using OSXCross, and it is not signed at all.

When you run the app for the first time, the following dialog is displayed:

.. image:: img/unsigned_1.png

To run this app, you can ad-hoc sign it yourself:

* Install ``Xcode`` for the App Store, start it and confirm command line tools installation.

> * Open "Terminal.app" (press ``Cmd + Space``, and enter "Terminal").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Open ``Terminal.app`` (press ``Cmd + Space``, and enter ``Terminal``).
```

* Navigate to the folder containing the target application.

>   Use ``cd path_to_the_app_folder`` command, e.g. ``cd ~/Downloads/`` if it's in the "Downloads" folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Use ``cd path_to_the_app_folder`` command, e.g. ``cd ~/Downloads/`` if it's in the ``Downloads`` folder.
```

> * Run following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run the following commands:
```
